Adding a variable is not too difficult. The steps depends on whether the variable uses a new classification and whether it has historical data.
1. Add the variable to Utilities/VariableListing.csv. Choose the right dimension, as described in classification_titles. Dim1 is only used for 3D variables, for the regions. Dim2 refers to the rows, and Dim3 refers to the columns. The summary and detailed columns are to indicate how the variable is displayed in the frontend.
2. If your variable uses a new dimension, you can add this to classification_titles.
3. If your variable has historical data, you can add this data in two different ways
    1. You can add this data in csv format in the Inputs folder. Ensure that the dimensions match with those in the VariableListing file.
    2. Alternatively, add your variable as a sheet to the Masterfile spreadsheet, and add the variable to Inputs/\_MasterFiles/FTT\_Variables.xlsx. It needs to be added in the tab related to the model where the variable belongs to. If the variable has historical data, also add it in the tab  "Time_Horizons". In this last one, the format is "tl_" + year when the series starts. Ensure that the dimensions match with those in the VariableListing file. Also ensure that the variable has enough information in the Masterfile for all years of the horizon to prevent errors, usually until 2100. 
4. When you've added your variable, run manager_new/update_manager_metadata.py. This ensures your variable is added to the json file which is needed for the frontend manager. 
