# Instructions for updating FTT-Heat

Updating FTT-Heat is more time-consuming than FTT-Power, and possibly comparable with FTT-Transport. Few of the necessary data are available for all countries, and updating therefore requires supplementing yearly time series with data from papers or non-English resources. Given that the market moves more slowly than transport and power, updating only every 5 years may be justifiable. Updating follows [A technical analysis of FTT:Heat- A simulation model for technological change in the residential heating sector](https://energy.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2018-02/technical_analysis_residential_heat_0.pdf). This document documents choices made in the 2023 update.

## Demand by technology
1. Energy for residential space and water heating is part of the IEA's Energy Efficiency dataset. People from UK universities can access this via [The UK data service](http://stats2.digitalresources.jisc.ac.uk/) using institutional log-in. Data for fuels are seperately downloaded; heat/water heating is also seperately downloaded. 
2. To split between condensing and non-condensing boilers in the EU, the [2021 Heating Market Report](https://ehi.eu/heating-market-report/heating-market-report-2021/) from the European Heating Industry was used. This replaced the EU Building Stock Observatory data, which was down in 2023. The EHI report contains a split of oil and gas seperately, but data needed to be filled in for smaller European countries. We filled this in as follows: Data for Central Europe was used for: Greece, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia, Croatia. Data for Spain was used for Portugal. Data for the EU average was used for Luxembourg, Finland, Malta. Data between 2015 and 2020 was linearly interpolated, whereas data from before that time used the 10% growth rate for condensing boilers as the original report indicated. Data outside the EU is very limited. Based on news on sales in China indicating a dominance of non-condensing boilers, but data from Canada and US indicated moderate regulation, the RoW seems less ambitious. The rest of the world is assumed to have half the condensing boilers share of the European average.
3. To make this split in Canada, we use the [National Energy Use Database, accessed September 2023](https://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/corporate/statistics/neud/dpa/menus/trends/comprehensive/trends_res_ca.cfm). Based on efficiencies, we classify the "normal - 60/62%" and "medium - 78/79" efficiencies as non-condensing, and "high - 85/90%" as condensing. We use the secondary energy, which should be the same as final energy for gas and oil furnaces/boilers.
4. We used the same split between biomass stoves and boilers. We were unable to find updated data. Note that in non-Eu contexts this doesn't make any sense, as methods are typically way less efficient. 
5. We computed the share of total household energy (HJFC) by dividing the water+space heating demand by model HJEF when data or a reasonable proxy is available. For other countries, we updated India using https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/2515-7620/acca6f (now 20%, was 10%), and we tried to find 
6. For solar thermal, we extract data from the 7 reports by IEA's Solar Heating & Cooling Programme. This includes data for 55 E3ME regions, and a "rest of world" region. The RoW is split between missing world regions based on RHUD in 2020. The split is between missing countries, and regions for which most data was missing.
7. The IEA Energy Efficiency dataset does not provide explicit numbers for heat pumps. Instead, heat pump numbers must be split out from the total heating demand from electricity. This is done using heat pump sales numbers from The European Heat Pump Association (EHPA). Although not publically available, this data was sent to us by Thomas Nowak (thomas.nowak@ehpa.org).
8. The EHPA data needed to first be converted from sales to heat pump stocks. This was calculated by totalling heat pump sales over the last 20 years (assuming this is the average lifetime of heat pumps). Stock numbers were then converted into useful heat. We used the assumed average heat pump capacities given in the EHPA data (air-air: 4KW; air-water: 12KW; ground: 14KW) and the assumed total operating hours (2000). 

### Aggregate heating demand
1. The previous version of FTT-Heat used aggregate heating demand projections from the IMAGE model. The most recent version of the model at the time of writing is IMAGE3.2 which no longer provides residential heating demand projections.
2. Instead, we use long term heating demand trends from Cambridge Econometrics' Building Stock Model for EU countries post 2020. Trends are calculated relative to 2020.
3. To ensure the historical and simulation periods match up well, where we have good data, we define RHUD (aggregate useful heating demand) as the sum of HEWG (useful heat demand by technology) as calculated by FTT-H from the HEWF (final heat demand by technology) defined above. This is more accurate than using out of date numbers from IMAGE. Now, in combination with the long term heat demand trends from the BSM, we can project RHUD forward to 2050 and, assuming trends are linear, to 2070.
4. For countries where we have poor or no HEWF data, we must rely on the existing aggregate demand data from IMAGE. 

## Investment and O&M costs
1. The Dainish Energy Agency (https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/technology-data-individual-heating-plants) provides investment and O&M cost data for Denmark for the majority of technologies in FTT:heat. We assume the same costs for condensing and non condensing fossil fuel boilers.
2. The IEA's Renewables 2021 publication (https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/data-tools/residential-heat-economics-calculator) provides investment and O&M cost data for Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and the UK for most FTT:heat technologies. To convert cost data from $/unit to €2020/KWh, we first convert currency and then assume the same heat production capacity numbers as The Dainish Energy Agency.
3. Coal is not covered in the DEA or IEA datasets. For this, we use the value given in Fleiter et al. (2016) which is for Germany.
4. Because the costs provided in the datasets are for a handful of countries, we use a scaling factor based on GDP/capita to create country specific costs. This is to account for the fact that in countries where wages are generally higher, installation costs and therefore investment costs are also likely to be higher. By finding the log of 2020 GDP/capita values and normalising to Denmark's value, we generate scaling factors that range from 0.4 (DR Congo) to 1.09 (Luxembourg).
5. In addition to the scaling factors, we assign appropriate proxies to countries without data. Southern European countries, for instance, use cost values for Italy. As a default, the French numbers are used because these represented heat pump costs that were determined typical by European standards. Scaling factors are still used to account for wage differences here.

## Fuel costs
1. In the EC technical analysis report, it's stated that NCV values in USD/toe are used of light oil (kerosene), gas and electricity. This data was not available in that format in 2023. As we were looking for a global dataset, we used the  World Energy Prices Yearly 2022 edition. We used the data for natural gas, kerosene and electricity, after confirming the data for kerosene was the same as light oil. Using the 2020 exchange rate data, we converted natural gas and electricity into €2020/kWh. For kerosene, the conversion was more involved. We have OECD data given in national currency/toe, which were converted to €/kWh using 2020 exchange rates and the standard 11.63 kWh / toe. 
2. To account for fuel price spikes from the Ukraine War, we first use household consumer prices from [Energy statistics - prices of natural gas and electricty](https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/energy/database). This provides spike data for gas and electricity for 2020-2022 in EU countries. Oil price spike data comes from [IEA World Energy Prices Yearly (via UK data service)](https://stats2.digitalresources.jisc.ac.uk/). We calculate the % increase from 2020 (our base year) values and insert this into the FTT-H variable HFFC (fuel price trends). We assume an average price spike that is twice as severe in non-European countries.
3. We assume energy prices will remain elevated, with 10% of the peak of the price shock remaining for oil and electricity and 25% for gas. Prices return linearly to these levels by 2027.

## Conversion efficiency
1. Conversion efficiency for non-heat pumps were updated using the 2020 values from the [2021 update of the DEA Technology Data for Heating Installations](https://ens.dk/en/our-services/projections-and-models/technology-data/technology-data-individual-heating-plants). For heat pumps, efficiency (SCOP) is climate and housing stock dependent. The 2017 version of the model used values from 2013. Since, efficiencies have increased significantly. We use the [2023 report: The Heat Pump Wave: Opportunities and Challenges from the JRC to update these numbers](https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC134045). The numbers (Figure 5) in the JRC are for space heating with air-water heat pumps. As water heating is typically less efficient, we subtract 0.15 from these SCOP values, which is the difference between the JRC value for Denmark and the value in the DEA for existing single houses. 
2. Air-air heat pumps SCOP values are scaled using the JRC data, with Denmark again as the reference. As such, the efficiencies are between 4.7 and 6.6. The JRC report indicates that no top-10 producer has an efficiency over 6.2. Thus, a correction of *0.9 is applied, so that efficiencies are between 4.1 and 6.0. 
3. For ground-source heat pumps, there is less temperature-dependence. Two sets of values were available in the literature: 3.45-4.35 according to the DEA (3.45 for radiator heating, and 4.35 for floor heating), and between 3 and 5.5 from [CE Delft's 2022 Update kentallen installaties Vesta MAIS](https://ce.nl/publicaties/update-kentallen-installaties-vesta-mais-2022/). Given that ground-source heat pumps are expensive, we assume around half of all people have done a prior investment in underfloor heating to make the investment worth-while. So we're raising the number from 3.5 to 3.9 in the update. For consistency with other technologies, we do not use the CE Delft data. 
4. To extend this to other countries, we divide countries in the same way as before based on heat degrees days into cold, average and warm. We compute the average SCOP for each of these 3 categories for air-water and air-air and assign SCOP values based on this. For countries for which HDD are not available, we use proxies. We use an updated HDD of 2010-2020 to account for historical global warming. This gives us:

| Climate | Air-water SCOP | Air-air SCOP |
| --- | ----------- | --- | 
| Cold | 2.7 | 4.6 |
| Average | 3.2 | 5.3 |
| Warm | 3.5 | 5.9 |

# Capacity factor
1. In the old model, capacity factors were significantly lower for air-source heat pumps. This was based on a 2013 European Commission guideline, as heat pumps often require back-up. However, modern heat pumps are much more suited to colder climates, and do not require as much back-up anymore. According to [Gibb et al., 2023](https://www.cell.com/joule/fulltext/S2542-4351(23)00351-3), back-up is only required for extreme cold climates. Similarly, [IRENA, 2022, p. 49](https://www.irena.org/Publications/2022/Nov/Renewable-solutions-in-end-uses-Heat-pump-costs-and-markets) states backup is typically needed only in cold climates for poorly insulated homes.
2. As such, we put the capacity factor for warm and average climates at the same value as fossil fuel technology. For cold climates, we make the assumption that half the deficit has been resolved. This means that we raise the capacity factor from 1.71 to 2.09 for air-water systems and from 1.97 to 2.22 for air-air heat pumps in cold climates.
3. Like with energy efficiencies, we update the classification of cold, average and warm using 2011-2020 heating degree days from IEA. Germany, United Kingdom, Romania, Turkey and Luxembourg go to from cold to average, Greece goes from warm to average. 

## Learning rate
1. The learning rate in FTT:Heat was set to 35% according to [Knobloch 2021](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030142152100118X), but the true learning rate in the model was slightly lower for unclear reason. The 2010 paper cited had heat pumps as an outlier. More recent estimates of learning are more modest. In the model update, we use a learning rate of 17%, which is the mean of the range given by [Jacob 2020, Heating and cooling in the built environment](https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780128187623/technological-learning-in-the-transition-to-a-low-carbon-energy-system).
2. We also introduce a learning rate on the efficiency, from the same source: it's 5% for the ground-source heat pump, and 9% for the air-water heat pump. The learning on efficiency acts on 1/COP. This has some knock-on effects: we also have to change HJET to be time-variant.

## Regulations
1. Regulations are required to represent the limitations of heating technologies. The share of District Heating is capped at 10 percentage points above the largest observed share between 1990-2020 since it is not available for all households. The share of Solar Thermal is limited to the share of heating demand that is water heating, reflecting the fact that Solar Thermal is predominantly used for water heating. In the case of Air-Air heat pumps, the opposite is true and its share is limited to the share of heating demand that is space heating.

## EU ETS2 
1. EU ETS2 is represented as an additional fuel tax (HTRT), rather than through the main carbon price in E3ME. ETS2 starts in 2027 at an initial limit of 45 EUR/tCO2 until 2031. This figure must be converted for use in HTRT. We do this by multiplying by the emission factor (units are kgCO2/MWh, available in the cost matrix BHTC) of each fuel type (oil - 266.76, gas - 201.96, coal - 353.88) and then dividing by 1,000,000. After 2031, we assume the ETS2 price will rise by 5% year-on-year.